---
title: DevOps - Adopting DevOps
# author:
#   name: Life Zero
#   link: https://github.com/lacie-life
date:  2022-02-08 11:11:11 +0700
categories: [Skill, Software, DevOps]
tags: [Tutorial]
# img_path: /assets/img/post_assest/
render_with_liquid: false
---

When it comes to adopting DevOps, one should consider the most optimal way to lead to rapid agility and deliverable services to potential customers in the market. In doing so, quality should not be compromised at all costs, though such a conviction stands out as one of the greatest challenges in the industry. According to many IT leaders in the market, implementing DevOps in practice can be the most useful aspect of accelerating software release with minimal complications while delivering a quality application for use. If one is considering moving in on the DevOps delivery model, several key approaches must first be taken into consideration.

First and foremost, one should embrace the DevOps mindset to stand apart from the rest. Switching to DevOps does not happen overnight, and one should be prepared for the hurdles involved in the development process. It is important to take the time and resources needed for such a feat into consideration. Understanding the gist of achieving the set goal matters a lot where DevOps development is concerned as well. The entire organization should have a common focus towards realizing the goal set at the beginning so that every member of the firm can work to achieve it in the end product. There are specific business needs that must be met, and the willingness to change along with any inevitable changes that show up during development must be adhered to anytime they crop in as the process go by in the organization.

The most prudent way to go about the process is to identify the current application streams that determine the resources needed during the development of the DevOps. These involve identifying series of activities necessary for moving the products from the initial development stages to the production level by understanding that the delivery process involves many constraints on the developer's part and seeing that there is a need to study the whole situation carefully. The bottlenecks, challenges, and unpleasant activities in the process enable the worker to identify and stick to what they are supposed to do or identify the best alternative to concentrate on during development. Besides, the organization only needs to

However, it is important to also identify current ineffective delivery areas that need to be improved as the best way of capitalizing on the opportunity at hand. To do so, one needs to experiment with the whole process and identify different faults that may exist. After identifying potential issues, concentrate on the most critical fault first. Then, follow up with the best time to execute the activity to accomplish the best delivery. There may be times where one needs to ask questions on what should be done, when to do them, and why the activity has to be carried out by the company. In such cases, the team must ponder the matter at hand and brainstorm the best alternative choices so that the end product is one of quality and usefulness. Sometimes there is a need to investigate the whole process and assemble all the resources needed along with necessary inputs that should be taken into consideration. Remember that the planning process must be intense in such a way that nothing is left out during the planning process. By doing so, all the factors are likely to be considered, and cost of carrying out is estimated according to the budget. Sometimes it hurts when an activity starts without clear plans on how to accomplish or finish it in the long run. As always, managing things beyond the scope of plan is difficult and even more so when all the other activities are on schedule. However, by thoroughly considering the business value, efficiency, and effectiveness of the entire process, the planning becomes very easy, and that determines the entirety’s success.

Within the industry, DevOps is often taken as synonymous with automation, but there is quite a difference in that automation is used to accelerate the manual process of the system, in other words the DevOps system. It is worth noting that DevOps primary concern is with collaboration and communication. These factors are catered for in software development of delivery, testing, and operation processes which make the system yield a desirable benefit for the organization.

After identifying the potential bottlenecks, one needs to make the most desirable metrics to be adopted in developing DevOps. During the adoption of DevOps, most people tend to overlook the right metric to be used in recording and tracking the progress, though such a tool is critical for successful adoption of the method. In this case, one should adopt the right baseline DevOps metric as early as possible and ensure that a key factor is considered during the adoption process to make it valuable and necessary. It can be demonstrated in the process of estimating the business benefits that would be earned in the long run.

One essential DevOps metric to be considered is the production failure rate, which can determine how often the system fails and whether failure occurs during fixed periods. From this perspective, one can anticipate any future failure in the system and plan for it in advance. What matters is that those involved know about such events occurring, and if so, they will not be taken by surprise when it eventually occurs. Also, determine the meantime, or the time the application will take, to recover. This is very important more so when it comes to DevOps adoption where the application code should not be complicated to hinder the recovery process. Besides, there is an average lead time, which has to be taken into consideration during DevOps adoption. Here, one determines the requirement of developing the whole process like the sources to be delivered, built and tested on deploy into production of the DevOps. Moreover, there is a need to determine the deployment speed where the version speed is estimated on the rate at which it can deliver. That should be integrated with the frequency of deployment, which is the release of the candidate test that concerns the production staging and production environment. Also, the meantime to production is highly considered during DevOps adoption, along with the time needed before new code committed in the production can yield results. One must be aware of what it takes for the whole process to be successful.

All the above metrics cannot limit one from exploring more since there is still much to be considered in the adoption process. There are many metrics to consider, but one should be careful not to collect undesirable metrics unsuitable for the adoption. Metrics that look impressive but not benefit the business should be avoided by all means. While these metrics may bolster outsiders’ view of the team, the numbers are of little or no benefit to the business in the long run. In fact, they may detract from the business by wasting valuable time and resources on collecting these metrics instead of addressing other, more vital concerns.

It is nevertheless important to look at the metrics and consider the relevant ones in deeper detail in such a way that the DevOps’s goals are in line with the metric incorporated. Essentially, it is good to share the DevOps goals to align them with the system development progress, which enhances an easy adoption process. The metric dashboard should be set in such a way that it displays the current situation which needs to be improved for it to be adaptable. Even in other instances, one is rewarded according to what they already have and the progress they need to make out of the existing situation at hand. With complete transparency of the metrics, developers are likely to achieve the set goal of the process within the timeline.

Additionally, the developers are required to understand and address the unique needs of the DevOps for it to be adopted. Similar to how the sellers of DevOps products need to know the specifications and technicalities of the product, the developers have to see that it fits all their needs. Every DevOps has specifications which make it unique and valuable for adoption. What needs to be analyzed is how it fits the need of a specific application and the important aspects to be looked at during its implementation. One cannot just drop an automated tool into the system and hire a selfproclaimed engineer to manage it without further investigation of what is required in the system adoption. Doing so would be insensitive and contrary to the technology fraternity.

Moreover, there should always be a specific business culture and journey to be followed to the letter during the adoption of a suitable DevOps to be employed in the system. Hence, there are always things or features that must match the need of the business for it to be profitable and desirable to the general public. How else can one adopt features which cannot help the system towards achieving set objectives of the organization? Consider a situation where customers do not like the business model used to deliver products. Most likely they will shy away from these products and opt to use competitors' products instead, incurring losses. No matter how unique the process is or tailor-made for a specific purpose, the customers’ needs and wishes must be given priority at all levels of production. For instance, customers will not be happy if there are twenty mandatory system updates, no matter the intention triggering such action. The company should instead focus on improving the usability, security, and other essential aspects of developing the DevOps system.

Also, adopting the iterative can start the whole process without causing issues. It is important to remember that during the initial stages of DevOps adoption, one should avoid an enterprise-wide reconfiguration. Instead, one should identify the pivotal applications necessary for running the software and apply the method to those areas first. Therefore, there is a need to examine cross-functional DevOps strategies like tests, developments, and operations to determine the need and the constraints of their existence in the system. These are crucial in creating deployment pipelines that can address the process—challenges that may be hard to handle. For that reason, one should measure the progress, wash, rinse, and success where the whole process should be repeated to arrive at the best solution.

Typically, one should consider the main value stream constraint in the system, which is likely to cause the greatest impact on the business. In most cases, such constraints can easily be solved in the system making it less destructive to the whole development process, though there are some who normally take much time to be resolved leading to high vulnerability of the system. It is prudent to adopt systems that can be easily changed and fine tuned in such a way that the whole process is made available for use. One will tend to go through some of the iterations to build confidence in the system on how they work, and use various features to improve the whole process in such a way that there is no loss incurred during development. For that reason, there is built-in confidence for the parties involved and enhanced expansion of other projects. Moreover, there is a chance that one should make progress on the metrics used in such a way that there is an improved quality of delivery and software modification.

In this case, it is important to ensure that the influencers involved in the process are liable for their actions and that the respective team members are made aware of their actions. Besides, the expert’s experience should not be locked up or constricted to a given set of principles that does not give room for expansion or is not up to the wellbeing of the whole process.

For those who are about to begin the DevOps journey, it is advisable to start from the delivery process then to production afterward. The development of the DevOps is made in such a way that its continuation depends on the initial stages. It has to graduate from one level to another for it to be more stable and desirable to be adopted by the developers of the software when the time is ripe. The property management and other management strategies are implemented in a unique way that enables it to have a downstream of the future process.

Furthermore, one can truly apply automation, which is the cornerstone for accelerating the adoption and delivery processes. There is a way of creating a conducive environment fit for all the developments, infrastructures, configurations, and necessary platforms needed to enhance a great improvement in the testing process during DevOps adoption. Most of these adoption processes should be in the form of defined written in code configured for the whole software development. Moreover, something like automation tools should be time-intensive and thoroughly run in the application though they are prone to error; one should take care of all the implications which come with it. By doing so, one can quickly benefit the team whereby the delivery times are highly reduced, and the repeatability of the adoption process is highly increased, thus eliminating any configuration drift that potentially exists in the system.

Standardizing the approach for automation should be given the top priority since it ensures that DevOps QA are adopted in the program development, and there is a common frame of reference that exists among the developers who communicate using common code language. Besides, it is important for one to adopt the use of software engineering best practices for DevOps automation. The quality of the application should match that of the automation used in the system.

Ultimately, there is awareness about the nature of DevOps that it cannot be bought by anyone or bolted or in a simpler way; it can only be achieved through the development of the software system. Though it normally takes time and there are many challenges along the way which must be incurred in order to realize its full potential and capability enhanced.

## Reasons for Adopting DevOps Culture

Digitization is taking over the world, and many industries are on their way to adopting the digital or automation method of service delivery. For this reason, there has been an increase of unparalleled demand for companies to experiment, innovate, and deliver a faster software system to take care of the prevailing tasks in the market. There is a desire to increase the agility and speed of the application performance which has become the survival skill in technology industries. Nowadays industries strive to adopt a more efficient, effective and flexible approach for software delivery, which eliminates barriers that may exist and promotes dependencies between development and operations.

Naturally, the DevOps team environment gives rise to responsibility for delivering great features, which creates stability in the system. These development team not only creates code that runs on the applications, but they also create room for advancement and improvement of the system, which is essential to every organization. One cannot just build a code that is not flexible to changes and the complexity of the technology in the world today. There must be a balanced room that is created by both teams to build insight and visibility of the application performance.

Therefore, it is important to analyze the importance of adopting DevOps system in the organization to get a clear view of events and operations. These reasons should be triggered in such a way that they support the customer's experience and expectations. In order to keep pace with the market demand, the operation and development team must adopt different strategies to create a competitive advantage through a test, deploy, build, and release of suitable software in an ever-faster cycle. Acceleration innovation should be adopted much faster to help the development team and integrated operation team to create and deploy a DevOps system much rapidly. It is vital to notice that most of the business today depends on the ability to create and innovate in order to compete fairly in the market. This can be attributed to change complexity, which exists, and it forces innovators to catch up with the system development.

Therefore, DevOps engineers are in a position to take advantage of the developing issues in the world today where the performance of data is quickly modified to fit the prevailing market demand. The impact of the application change ensures that the developers can code the data effectively thus ensuring stability of the system. Besides, the software tends to fix faster, and the developer only needs to check the current situation of the system for modification.

The other reason for adopting DevOps is because of its improved collaboration nature. Instead of focusing on eliminating the existing difference between the disciplines for its development, DevOps only promise to build bridges and creates a system where they can work together for the betterment of the whole process. From this perspective, software development culture can focus on working together to create the best application for their customers and not on internal competition or any purported disparity. The main agenda is to research, innovate, and improve the system for the betterment of the organization. One can use a code today to develop a system but later realize that there is a better way of modifying the code to fit the need and that usually requires innovativeness on the developer’s part. In this industry, the focus is on continuous achievement and not an individual gain that may be created to combat competition. Rather it is not a matter of tossing application code and hoping for things to work out with the best interest of the developers. Team members seem to embrace the environment in which they work and the interaction involved when creating a DevOps software.

Also, there is increased efficiency, which makes DevOps suitable for adoption. These are enhanced through automated tools and standardized production platforms created by the development and operation team. Moreover, there are best practices put in place to aid the deployment and delivery tools more predictable that the IT team can easily do the tasks repetitively. These are carried out with automated testing tools that ensure that integration processes are complete, and the developers have created an effort to avoid frittering away codes. Besides, the acceleration and development platforms of DevOps offer many other opportunities which aim at improving the efficiency of the system. Some of these opportunities are scalable infrastructure, which is a cloud-based solution to DevOps. The scalable infrastructure aim at creating testing speed and deployment process, which increase the access to hardware resources. Additionally, the compilation and development tools are integrated into the system to shorten the development cycle while, on the other hand increasing the delivery process of the products. These can be supported with continuous delivery workflow witnessed in DevOps to create a frequent software release to the world today.

DevOps are associated with a reduced failure approach, which is enhanced through a shorter development cycle, which promotes frequent code release. With great modular implementation, there is a likelihood that there is a problem in configuration, application code, and infrastructure, which are executed by the DevOps. The fact that the DevOps tend to engage members in the life cycle of the application makes it more admirable, and the resulting development gives rise to high-quality code for the system. However, there are fewer fixes that are required by the developers to make the whole process to be realistic. As depicted in the recent report about DevOps adoption, it was established that organizations that have adopted the DevOps culture into their system are 60 times less likely to experience any failure as compared to other firms that have not consider it. From this research, one can conclude that DevOps is safer for use and every organization should look into ways of adopting it for system efficiency. By implementing devops approach, organization can be assured that their system is safe from fraud, and any other intrusion which may arise from hawking attempt due to its stability.

Critically, DevOps adoption into the system accelerates the recovery time from the bugs and malfunction of the system. The deployment process is primarily isolated to the target, and it has an easy spot that can be fixed faster due to its easy implementation nature. The only thing that the team needs to do is to check the latest code and update the system accordingly whereby issues arising are updated in time thus reducing the software risk. In this case, the resolution time is faster since it has a responsible troubleshooting capability that stands out for itself. In fact, there is a high recovery of DevOps failure which has been witnessed in the world today. Ultimately, there is an increased satisfaction realized by the use of DevOps. Instead of power or rule-based culture, DevOps has been established to promote more performance-based environments in the software industry. Due to that, there is increased risk-sharing which has reduced the bureaucratic obstacles that previously existed in the software industry. As a result, there has been a more content and productive workforce that dominates the market currently, and this workforce helps boost business performance. The developers usually prefer to work in DevOps environments due to effectiveness and efficiency of the team who work towards achieving a common goal with selfless interest on personal gain. Through that, the engineers and the developers can fit well in the system since their roles are well defined according to the need they are supposed to satisfy. Remember that they are available on demand and when the role is well-defined, they are likely to spend less time at the project and at the same time, yield a greater result.

Teamwork also plays a crucial role in ensuring that all the resources for development and operation are within their reach. The software delivery is much important and essential in today’s digital age where everything is digitized to meet the human need or market demand. Since personal effort cannot meet all the human needs, there has been a situation where the automation is involved in the whole process to make things work effectively thus creating the need for DevOps software. It is this software that accelerates the market service and rolls out features that are effective and efficient. Moreover, it is not just a simple process that can be implemented overnight by the developers; it requires time and resources for it to be implemented to achieve its full delivery, and when done correctly, it pays the highest return.

## DevOps Adoption Hurdles

Despite the breakthrough in IT maturity in the world today, most of the organizations still find it hard to embrace DevOps practices. According to Forrester's research, 50 percent of organizations are still testing the efficacy and usefulness of this concept, while only 13 percent have adopted and implemented this technology milestone in their software system. On the contrary, 9 percent of companies still have no plans of adopting DevOps practices. Moreover, there is more theory behind the slow uptake of DevOps in the world which proves to justify different technological challenges faced by the DevOps development in the world today.

Analytically, some experts depict that the application development has been made disperse by different agencies that exist in the industry while the infrastructure is owned by the commonwealth technology office. For that reason, silos have developed, and for DevOps to work, these restrictions must be aborted. On top of that, there is a broad array of systems that have made it difficult to adopt whereby the automation and continuous processes are made difficult for DevOps to work efficiently. Besides, the skills to support the full development of DevOps are not readily available in the state, creating the reluctance of application adoption in most industries. The organizations need to employ experts who can be responsible for the development of the DevOps system to its full utilization. It wise to note that every technological advancement needs an expert who would be responsible for its operation in the organization. In this case, many organizations find it difficult to employ suitable personnel for such tasks, making it more difficult to adopt such a system.

Technically, there have been pangs of culture change witnessed in DevOps adoption where most of the firms used the same principle. This principle has shorter and tighter feedback loops and weak usability testing. There is a high probability that most of these departments have not embraced DevOps shops. There is a need for a cultural shift, which arises from the way these departments operate, and this cannot be forced overnight. The development should be exercised over a given period, making it adaptable with the existing culture in the organization. Even though there is a need to devolve in DevOps application, it requires time to mature. It is very important to get over the IT system in such a way that all the modifications are made available. If so, one can access all that is required, but all these cannot be reached in the DevOps system, leading to delay in its adoption. For one to achieve these, one will have to revert to the right approach.

People-related issues have been identified as the major barrier to DevOps adoption. These barriers range from limited budget, diverse culture, and lacking IT skill sets. The only thing that can make transfer successful is when the company has no challenges in adopting the system. Moreover, these challenges seem to be more diverse for most people to handle and this makes it an expensive venture for most of the companies. But organizations do not always stick to traditional technology because of budgeting issues. Some stick to that old technology to retain the clients and make things possible for the developers. The idea of DevOps normally does not appeal to every company, and some only intend to use it partially, not as the main technological software in the organization. Due to this fact, the organization can be forced to bring along support who can understand the DevOps concept to ease the process of service delivery. There is a critical transformation tool that must be considered by the organization to ensure that all these challenges are taken care of within the timeline.

A fundamental rethinking on how the system works is taken into consideration, and to some extent, people create a business-oriented atmosphere where all the software application is analyzed. By doing so, there are resources committed to the task, which may make it a more expensive task to carry out. Creating the most effective and efficient venture ensures that all the development of DevOps is eased by the organization. Hence, chances are heightened for its adoption. However, there are groups within the organization that are allergic to change, and they always insist that the firm should always stick to traditional technology where there is no automation.

Apart from the culture, which is the basis for DevOps development, a continuous process of DevOps development creates a delivery platform for adoption. It is a slow process, and sometimes organizations may prefer a faster system where they can automate things quickly and efficiently without much ado in the process. In such cases, the adoption of the application becomes difficult. The organization would have to employ external expertise to monitor the functionality of the system along with the engineers to create the best platform for the DevOps and the general operation team. Therefore, with a short timeline for adoption, all these resources cannot be accessed by the management within the timeline limit. Whatever is good must be pursued by an entrepreneur who deserve to get something good out of the deal. Moreover, there is a possibility that most of the organizations will prefer to use the old technology to replace the current need which may involve much spending on the system.

Technically, the government-sponsored firms are prone to create a competitive advantage in the market, which may not be readily available in some of the industries across the world. The monopolistic legacy created by these enterprises makes it very difficult for others to catch up with the market trend. Remember that these sponsored enterprises usually receive support from the government to cater to the production cost while other firms may only finance their ventures through their earnings, a method that proves to be much more expensive in the long run. Self-sponsored industries tend to incur losses at the end of the day due to high trading costs, which they may experience during DevOps development and adoption. Due to that, they are inclined to shy away from DevOps adoption and opt for another cheap alternative in the market.

## Signs That an Organization Is Not Ready for DevOps

Currently, DevOps is changing the way organizations operate, perform, and deliver on software necessary for their full utilization of resources. Most of the time, organizations are struggling to stand up on their own with the existing traditional technology, which tends to be outdated and ineffective thus creating inefficiency. Therefore, there are some signs which show that the organization is not yet ready for transformation through the new technology trend, DevOps, in their operation.

Whereas some organizations treat DevOps as the new trend in the market to justify their attention and any expenses spent on it, others still find it hard to adopt DevOps. These companies tend to maintain the traditional silos that they can still build or tack on without hustle at their part. All they do is rename the team but not the system to the DevOps development and operation team. Instead, they rename the two teams as the Agile and DevOps team respectively. In this case, the developers usually strive to deliver changes rapidly, and operations continue to deliver slow deployment, which inclines to be in terms of quality, which may not be acknowledged in terms of urgency in the system development. Moreover, the automation done by these teams does not serve the right purpose thus making it inefficient at the end of everything else or after the activities of the assigned teams.

One should understand that without bridging the “Dev” and “Ops,” one cannot create collaboration, which is as a result of more repeatable or high code delivery quality of the application for consumption. In case one has not developed the team into a considerable DevOps team and operation together, chances are high that there will be no continuous integration, delivery and quality of the whole process to succeed.

In some instances, signs of dysfunctional can be detected when people are not using the Agile team, though there are many scenarios that suggest one can use Agile without DevOps but not DevOps without Agile. Therefore, what it depicts is that one cannot develop a high-quality application without involving DevOps in the system. There is continuous implementation of the software in most organizations, but some do not embrace its existence, making it more difficult to adopt by the organization. If, by any case, one is trying to adopt the delivery of a waterfall project, one must be sure to release the product once or twice a year to make it relevant and adaptable in the system. The code may not change every day, but there is a need for modification which may arise now and then. All these depend on the client’s feedback on what they want, expect and how their products should look like to make it effective. In case one is not willing to actualize the whole process, they should be ready to fail. Deployment to production can also be done in such a way that the automation process is free of any defect which may arise.

When one finds themself in such a situation, it is high time to find an agile coach or those who can help in transforming. The investment in DevOps should pay off at the end of the day, and if in case it does not pay back the investors, it means that there is something wrong in the process or during implementation.

Normally, failure is not an option in the DevOps adoption in the organization. Nevertheless, the cultural aspect of the organization tends to play a major role in DevOps adoption. These cultural aspects may deem to be the difficult part of DevOps adoption. However, DevOps may have all that it takes to make everything right, but the mindset of the personnel in the organization determines the result and whether it leads to failure or success. There are some of the organizations which are risk-averse and are not ready to take any risk by adopting DevOps in their system. The mindset of the leaders in these organizations is hard to change since they will always prefer the old system they have been using from the past. Some are afraid due to public shaming, closed doors, or scolding by management, which may exist during deployment to production. One should understand that culture is not always conducive for the DevOps since DevOps comes with its own culture, one that has to be followed to the letter. As such, many organizations are afraid of adopting DevOps due to the fear that a stringent culture may not be easily adopted by developers. For that reason, many tend to shy away from the developing and operation processes of DevOps, which are demanding and have high resource requirements.

Furthermore, failures should be treated as special and as a learning opportunity for the developers. Some organizations take it a step further, and they never give room for conceptualizing the whole process or make an attempt to understand what has happened or the reason for failure. Such organizations are hard to deal with since they tend to make life difficult for their employees and even for themselves to adapt to new technology advancement. For one to reverse such situations, they need to get the best out of everything within the shortest time possible. Importantly, failures should be shared and made clear for clarification.Anyone who needs help must acknowledge such a need and give reasons for why they need assistance. It is only those who help themselves who can be helped, and in this case, when the failed organization is in a position to acknowledge, accept, and seek help, that is when the company can be helped. In most cases, organizations fail to seek help from the experts thinking that the organization is perfect and does not deserve to be helped. That mental schema is very wrong and should be avoided by all means.

## Steps to DevOps Success

Since its inception, people have been debating the success of DevOps, or lack of, in the IT circles to determine its long-term fate. Some consider it as revolutionizing IT operations, while others regard it as a marketing fad. There has been a rapid growth prediction on this concept, which people have been capitalizing on over the years. In fact, there has been an improvement for the last decade regarding the same concept which make things to work on different perspectives of the business dealings. Here, DevOps failure has been largely blamed on people who do not understand how it operates or how it works—people who do not understand the different aspects of the software which make it legible. These people cannot realize the value of the software, and to some extent, cannot understand anything concerning IT development in the world today.

Therefore, people should prepare for the cultural shift that came with the DevOps adoption where people must integrate tools needed for transformation for a single entity. These cultural shifts mark the beginning of DevOps' success in an organization where the teams can master the code system of DevOps and how they develop. Though it is a difficult challenge to face such shift in cultural practices, care should be taken not to arbitrate the set goals and objectives of achieving full DevOps adoption.

Most DevOps adoption success stories begin with the top management team, who accepts the idea, then passes it to junior staff who are ordained to be part of the implementation team. There is a need to disassociate name or rank with the function one has to take in the process of developing, implementing, and delivering the DevOps code to responsible company needs. The value of each team member should be brought on board to make it viable and achievable project.

In case one needs to shift the cultural value of the company, there is a need to shift the incentives as well to make such change effective and welcomed. Moreover, some organizations prefer to work on-call where there is a high probability that one can understand the prevailing challenges in the process. From this experience, organizations can identify different potentials and capabilities among the developers and operators team where they can assign different tasks according to the speculation. By doing so, the organization can facilitate faster production thus increases the turnover. Ultimately, the organization must encourage creation of continuous integration and delivery platforms. Here, the developers ought to get full information about what they need to do. For example, they should receive accurate and up-to-date data needed for the production. Such information eases the deployment process, and the developer can easily build on the appropriate approach to develop, run, and monitor code in the system. Moreover, there are major bugs that must be handled and presented accurately to developers to help them diagnose the software used in the organization. From this point, the DevOps team is to take care of the service lifecycle thus making an effort worth the investment put into it by creating good planning, deployment, and maintenance of the software.



















