---
title: DevOps - The Future of DevOps
# author:
#   name: Life Zero
#   link: https://github.com/lacie-life
date:  2022-02-09 11:11:11 +0700
categories: [Skill, Software, DevOps]
tags: [tutorial]
# img_path: /assets/img/post_assest/
render_with_liquid: false
---

When discussing DevOps future and the road map that the technology is following, industry savants tend to concentrate on the bleeding edge, which comprises new technologies, management styles, and deployment techniques that seem to arise from nowhere. It is not predictable to determine where people are heading to in managing DevOps. Moreover, it is evident that the future of technology advancement is right before our eyes, and we cannot run from it. The only thing left right now is to embrace the new technology more so the DevOps application. Besides, the world of infrastructure as code is rapidly being congested by serverless networks, which already exists in the software workspace that is full of container technologies.

In a fast, high-tech developing world, software developers and technical leaders are trying to identify signs that an idea is creating a level of equilibrium and willing to get a head start that can allow them to strategize themselves. On that note, technology firms tend to take advantage of the uptrend and coming technical landscape, which has dominated the market lately. It is quite evident that there are widespread collaboration and effective communication between software developers and IT professionals due to DevOps culture narrowing the world into a global technological hub, which allows almost every individual to easily access information that they may require. These have created a need in the market gap, where every individual tends to cope up with the new technology. The DevOps manner of traveling is essentially a continuation from role to culture, and it will not be surprising to see rising and future generations adopting it as their daily way of living. The technology expected in the future can be predicted by looking at advancements dominating the world today, and people seem to engross themselves in the ever-changing and new marvels unveiled in the sector each day. This culture is now being adopted in almost every sector in the market economy, and governmental departments are not exempted. Everyone is now feeling the need to be technologically advanced because the world has changed greatly with time.

Evidently, there have been more worries for software developers in the world today. However, it should not be a problem for many as we continue to discover the power of new technology. Soon, tech firms will not have to be so much worried about security issues as the DevOps team is going to possess a renewed focus on security backed by three essential elements, namely, development, operations, and application delivery. Security will be created into the entire DevOps system, which will reduce vulnerabilities. There will be an ultimate combination of DevOps culture and security practices that will enable DevOps software systems to automate and enforce security policies in the current and future technology-dependent society. Increased agility and a more scalable system will have to be developed by DevOps teams shortly to allow for concepts and methodologies like continuous integration and continuous release to be explicitly implemented, whereby automation will assume an even larger role. Revenue from digital modification and transformation and related software products and services will increase to 127 percent by 2020 as foreseen by IDC. This will occur due to rapid and consistent purchasing of software deliveries and products in the market economy which will become important and basic requirements in tech firms.

Operations will still have to be one of the fundamental requirements in the tech firms in an advanced evolving way, and essential data models will have to be created by data scientists. Data scientists will have to focus on building more developed software to enhance effective storage and delivery of quality information in a highly computerized world. This will leave operations engineers with the responsibility of deciding the best infrastructure approach to be used for each software solution, be it a containerized application or a serverless one. Sufficient computer processing power will have to be one of the major concerns of software operations engineers to enhance reliable processing of huge amounts of data being streamed and trained for machine learning. So it is quite evident that code awareness is going to be improved by these engineers to enable software developers better understand and evaluate the infrastructure requirements of applications and data pipelines. Furthermore, for this to be made possible, there will need to be mature coordination between software developers and operations team, as they are the ones responsible for creating the basic roots of computer progression.

Using DevOps teams will lead to a vast increase in data-driven applications, which in turn will promote technological invention and innovation in current business enterprises. The influence of such products on the market will support the rise of a more technically advanced economy, which will change the way goods and services are being purchased. As business is the driving factor behind the success of any economy, governments have already begun handing out subsidies to support technological growth and development in their respective countries to create more technologically-minded individuals. So the government is supporting the DevOps team and working hand in hand with the team as they need their technical brilliance to spread in all government sectors to improve the country’s economy. So the DevOps team is going to experience even extensive government support soon.

DevOps are continually growing and developing their software skills in the industry. Moreover, development and operations teams are spreading their wings into a more developed and reliable, high-performance delivery world and this is going to make the DevOps culture be adopted by numerous companies that are interested in benefiting from their technological skills and knowledge to enhance them develop their software competency. So in the near future, we shall witness the DevOps culture being practiced in almost all tech firms, institutional facilities, and even in the health sector to enhance efficiency in service delivery.

The extensive use of infrastructure as code will ensure more flexibility when determining the server location by changing the code description. These can be done as soon as the application is installed in the organization system to ensure that there are efficiency and effectiveness in operation. However the people are expected to write codes so that they all can interrogate the large bodies of log reports to enable them to predict what next is required. By doing so, they can create efficiency of the system where future changes can be demonstrated early enough to evade any challenges which may inhibit the firm from functioning well. Besides, the code produced using automated services, which are well implemented by the DevOps team ensure flexibility in the system. One would not prefer to have a system that is vulnerable to changes and cannot adapt to new demands. For this reason, developers will thrive on producing the best codes for the organization which will withstand all situations. Stable code will be easily advanced by the experts whenever the need arises.

Software developers will be obliged to adopt the DevOps philosophy in their work procedures. This is due to the increasing number of Artificial Intelligence-driven apps and algorithms that have become rampant in the high tech world. To counteract the incoming competition, they have to keep pace and change with changes which may arise in the tech world. Moreover, DevOps strategies and methodologies will be expected to be their universal option in dealing with automated pipelines, maintaining, and testing numerous integrated models in the software production chain. That has to be integrated into the system by the DevOps development and operation team to ensure that all other inputs and outputs match the organization's goals and objectives. In turn, it will augment higher production of software products, thereby increasing their level of sales. By doing so, the sales margin will increase, making the organization prosper and generate high profit margin.












